so I don't know if you're familiar with
the three body problem the the not the
Chinese science fiction novel made a big
splash as a Netflix series recently but
it's the novels that really grapple with
what you are talking about and what's so
remarkable about this series to me is
that unlike a lot of American Science
Fiction you've get Star Trek Star Wars
which kind of give you this Misty
secular pseudo science where it's the
medoran that P things together or it's
our humanist values in Star Trek in
these this Trilogy of novels remembrance
of Earth's past the first book is named
after famously an
unresolvable problem in in astrophysics
in Newtonian mechanics if you have three
bodies mutually attracting each other
it's impossible to lay out a logos
exactly what you're describing that is a
consistent system that can be reduced to
abstract principles comprehended by the
human mind and then used to fly outer
space to navigate through whatever
situation you find yourself in and the
reason that shishino named began with
this is because he is genuinely peering
into the abyss of what science looks
like once you pull the rug of those five
principles out from underneath us that
there you might hit a point at which
actually the whole structure of reality
simply scrambled your monkey brain it
just doesn't compute inside of us
because we no longer have this
conviction that the imprint on our brain
is the is effectively the hand of God
and so that's the same imprint that RIT
large is is pressed across the whole
universe when Newton came up with his
laws there was a widespread belief
derived from Aristotle that there were
two sets of rules for the physical world
it was called the super lunary and the
sublunary spheres and that there was Nam
that because the barrier was supposed to
be at the Moon where the moon's orbit is
there starts to obtain a whole new set
of of laws and the reason people thought
this is quite reasonable is that you
look at the stars and they're following
these very regular patterns that we can
chart and know more and more through
observations you look at things around
here they don't move like that kind of
clockwork surely you get Stones falling
to the Earth you get fire moving up into
the air and so people thought they're
just a different Christians would say
Fallen order down here and there is a
pristine Reason Music of the Spheres yes
operating even perhaps the angels are
pushing them around whatever and what as
opposed to forces as opposed to exactly
yes this is a big in my in my book I
call them ghosts in Exile the forces
because right and and this idea is what
when when Newton comes out with the
prinkipia for the first time we now
think oh he discovered gravity yes of
course he outlines the way of of
calculating the force of gravity between
two masses but at a much much deeper
level what he does is he shatters the
barrier between the sublunar and the
super lunar spheres because now showing
underlying Unity right here's the three
rules that will govern not only the Arc
of a comet across the sky but the
Descent of an apple from a tree why did
Newton have any right to expect that he
could do that why were people working on
that problem at that time it's because
of the assumptions that your
describing that the world is not only
organized according to AOS which is sort
of the Pagan claim that we talked about
in Greece but also that that logos is
answerable to the patterns that are in
our minds however they came about you
talk about Evolution you talk about
whatever but we now have and this is
what we experience them as it's
dishonest I think to describe our
experience of these principles as
anything else when when we see math we
think we're looking at something
universally valid and that something
that not only hangs together in our
brains but will also send a rocket ship
to Mars one day and that's because of
this Faith the and that is something
like that is something like a transposed
monotheistic Faith it's the notion that
at the foundation or at the Pinnacle
there is an ultimate unity in which
resides all things in the absence of
contradiction yes right so now we're up
against we wouldn't recognize it this
way but we're up against another Super
lunary sublunary barrier and that is the
puzzle of how to reconcile relativity
with with quantum mechanics and I know
that you've talked to scientists about
this on on your podcast and I would I
would say of course that like I am not
going to be the person that resolves
this puzzle but from the outside as a
scholar of the history of Science and
also a classicist I can see that this is
the exact same issue this is two Realms
that answer to two different and
contradictory set of apparently
contradictory set of laws and scientists
are currently hammering away some of
them working in string theory others in
other versions of you know quantum
gravity and so forth are hammering away
at that barrier right under the
presumption that break through yes
exactly that the fact that they can't
detect the unity is actually a
consequence of their ignorance not of
the fact that reality itself is
disjointed that there's a Fab there's a
seam in the fabric that we will never
bring back together or alternatively
that there's a seam in our minds that we
can never reconcile that there's
something we need both both of these
convictions and I think that anybody
that does science is still operating on
these convictions even if outwardly they
would they would deny it well if the
hypothesis of Yung is true in the broad
sense and that you see it implies
something very interesting that I also
saw as a practicing practicing scientist
so I was involved and still am in a lot
of research Enterprises right the
production of approximately the
equivalent of 30 phds it's something
like that
and I watched scientists who were
genuine scientists and scientists who
were careerists and huers and I watched
how they operate and it's so interesting
because the scientists that actually
discover something of value and I would
say the ones that have the deepest
careers and the best relations with
their students the ones that are on the
right path
yeah they're suffused by uh religious
ethos and and it it's very deep so I
spent a lot of time I wouldn't say
mastering statistics because I'm no
statistical genius but understanding how
to conduct a statistical analysis yeah
well enough so that I could do it and
actually do it and actually understand
it yeah and one of the things that I
realized was like if you have a
spreadsheet that's full of data 100,000
data points let's say there is an
indefinite number of ways that you can
apprehend that Matrix that you can see
it right there's all the possible
combinations of the numbers in the in
the Matrix right okay so then out of
that you can draw a discovery let's say
that's revealed in the patterns but you
cannot do that if your orientation to
the spreadsheet is the progression of
your
career the pathways that make themselves
manifest in the numbers will be those
that further your career so this is part
of the problem of replicability
soing exactly you can do an infinite
number of correlational analysis and if
you do a hundred of them five of them
will be statistically significant well
you can just ignore the fact that
95% of them weren't and report on those
5% and the thing is there's a profound
pull to do that because in any given
experiment you might have to Any Given
experiment you might have devoted two
years of your life for a graduate
student the success of the analysis
might determine whether or not they get
their PHD like there's a lot at stake
and so then you might say well why not
just discover within the Matrix of
numbers the pathway that furthers your
career yeah and the answer to that is
well that's a complicated problem it's
like is there anything other than
self-promotion well you I told my
students if you allow your careerist
interests to determine the decisions you
make when you're conducting your
statistics which will be well hidden
uhhuh from everyone else but also from
yourself one of the negative
consequences is that well you betray the
spirit of science so you pull the rug
out from underneath yourself but you
also convince yourself of the existence
of a delusion that you might then cha
Chase for the rest of your life right
one so yeah yeah yeah so it's so
interesting and this is something that
scientists don't really concentrate on
it's like how do you in in culcate in
the scientific investigator the ethos
that produces the desire to search for
truth and not Career Success let's say
at every micro level of the scientific
Endeavor and I think that once the
scientific Endeavor becomes sufficiently
dissociated from its underlying Jud
judeo-christian narrative yeah there is
no protection against that and I also
think that's why the scientific
Enterprise is corrupting so rapidly
[Music]